Oxidative Stress and Cytokines in the Pathogenesis of Pancreatic Cancer .
Pancreatic cancer is one of the most aggressive , drug resistant and lethal types of cancer with poor prognosis .
Various factors including reactive oxygen species , cytokines , growth factors , and extracellular matrix proteins are reported to be involved in the development of pancreatic cancer .
However , the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer has not been completely elucidated .
Oxidative stress has been shown to contribute to the development of pancreatic cancer .
Evidences supporting the role of reactive oxygen species and cytokines as a risk for pancreatic cancer and the concept of antioxidant supplementation as a preventive approach for pancreatic cancer have been proposed .
Here , we review the literature on oxidative stress , cytokine expression , inflammatory signaling , and natural antioxidant supplementation in relation to pancreatic cancer .
INTRODUCTION .
Reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) and cytokines are considered to be important factors in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer.XREF _ BIBR , XREF_BIBR As a source of ROS , nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate ( NADPH ) oxidase ( NOX ) is involved in pancreatic cancer development.XREF _ BIBR ROS activate signaling pathways mediated by p38 mitogen activated protein kinases ( MAPK ) , NF-kappaB , and janus kinase and signal transducer and activator of transcription ( JAK and STAT ) , XREF_BIBR-XREF_BIBR which inhibits cancer cell apoptosisXREF_BIBR and induces cytokine expressionXREF_BIBR and epithelial-mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) .
XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR High levels of fibronectin and laminin , XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR cytokines ( interleukin-1beta [ IL-1beta ] , IL-6 , IL-8 , and tumor necrosis factor-beta [ TNF-beta ] , XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR and growth factors ( insulin like growth factor-1 [ IGF-1 ] and transforming growth factor-beta [ TGF-beta ] ) XREF_BIBR are observed in pancreatic cancer .
Growth factors , XREF_BIBR extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins , XREF_BIBR and cytokines ( interferon-gamma [ IFN-gamma ] and TNF-alpha ) XREF_BIBR-XREF_BIBR have been shown to activate NOX in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer development .
Bioactive compounds such as curcumin , genistein , and resveratrol have antioxidantXREF_BIBR-XREF_BIBR and antitumor activitiesXREF_BIBR-XREF_BIBR against pancreatic cancer .
We will briefly review the role of ROS and cytokines in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer .
In addition , bioactive compounds that may prevent the development of pancreatic cancer will also be discussed .
REACTIVE OXYGEN SPECIES AND NICOTINAMIDE ADENINE DINUCLEOTIDE PHOSPHATE OXIDASE IN PANCREATIC CANCER .
Since ROS and pro inflammatory cytokines induce genetic instability , these factors may contribute to cancer development.XREF _ BIBR , XREF_BIBR Activation of NOX releases high amounts of ROS , which may contribute to development of cancers .
Pro inflammatory cytokine IFN-gamma induces the activation of a family of NOX , dual oxidase 2 ( DUOX2 ) , to produce ROS in human pancreatic cancer cells.XREF _ BIBR  K-ras mutation is identified in 95 % of pancreatic cancer , implying its critical role in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer .
Recent study showed that NOX2 protein is present in pancreatic tumor cells and tumorigenic cells expressing K-ras while NOX2 was absent in the non tumorigenic pancreatic ductal epithelial cells.XREF _ BIBR In pancreatic cancer cells with K-ras , genetically silencing rac decreases ROS production and inhibits cell growth.XREF _ BIBR The study demonstrates that NOX is important for ROS production and growth inhibition in K-ras-expressing cells since rac is a component of the active form of NOX .
Growth factors and ECM proteins mediate growth of pancreatic cancer cells .
Growth factors such as IGF-1 and IGF-2 stimulate NOX4 and produce ROS , which protect pancreatic cancer cells ( MIA PaCa-2 and PANC-1 ) from apoptosis.XREF _ BIBR , XREF_BIBR In addition , ROS induce activation of JAK2-STAT1/3 pathway , leading to suppression of apoptosis.XREF _ BIBR ECM proteins fibronectin and laminin also activate NOX in pancreatic cancer cells.XREF _ BIBR ROS have shown to mediate epithelial-mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) in pathophysiological condition.XREF _ BIBR NOX4 generated ROS are involved in TGF-beta-induced EMT in pancreatic cancer cells by activating p38 MAPK and inhibiting protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B ( PTP1B ) .
XREF_BIBR Since PTP1B inhibits EMT , inhibition of PTP1B by ROS contribute EMT in pancreatic cancer development .
DUOX is one of the 7 members of the NOX family .
The pro inflammatory stimuli such as IFN-gamma enhance the expression of DUOX2 , leading to the production of substantial amounts of extracellular H 2 O 2  in human pancreatic cancer BxPC-3 and AsPC-1 cells.XREF _ BIBR H 2 O 2  induces the activation of STAT1 and NF-kappaB signaling pathways in pancreatic cancer cells.XREF _ BIBR Crosstalk of ROS and cytokines in cancer related signaling is summarized in XREF_FIG .
ROS are produced by NOX with stimulation of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins , XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR growth factors , XREF_BIBR and cytokines.XREF _ BIBR-XREF_BIBR ROS activates p38 MAPK , XREF_BIBR NF-kappaB , XREF_BIBR and JAK2-STAT1/3 , XREF_BIBR which is believed to contribute to the carcinogenesis of pancreas since these signaling mediators induce ECM and expression of cytokines ( IL-1beta , IL-6 , IL-8 , TNF-alpha , and TGF-beta ) XREF_BIBR-XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR-XREF_BIBR as well as inhibit apoptosis of cancer cells .
Antioxidant compounds such as curcumin , XREF_BIBR resveratrol , XREF_BIBR and genisteinXREF_BIBR may inhibit ROS mediated signaling and thus prevent the development of pancreatic cancer .
INFLAMMATORY CYTOKINES IN PANCREATIC CANCER .
Cytokines promote pancreatic tumor cell progression by modulating tumor microenvironment as well as directly acting on cancer cells for growth , invasion and metastasis .
Cytokines are produced from the leukocytes and stellate cells which are infiltrated into the damaged tissues .
In the serum of pancreatic cancer patients , pro inflammatory cytokines IL-6 , IL-8 , TGF-beta , TNF-alpha , and IL-1beta were increased compared to healthy controls.XREF _ BIBR , XREF_BIBR-XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR-XREF_BIBR  IL-6 induces the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) in pancreatic cancer cells and stimulates angiogenesis and tumor vascularization.XREF _ BIBR IL-6 induced phosphorylation of STAT3 , which in turn , mitochondrial localization of pSTAT3 promotes pancreatic tumorigenesis by activating cell proliferation and inhibiting autophagy.XREF _ BIBR  IL-1beta promotes pancreatic cancer cell invasiveness.XREF _ BIBR IL-1beta induces constitutive activation of NF-kappaB and expression of cyclooxygenase-2 of pancreatic cancer cells and these cancer cells become chemoresistant.XREF _ BIBR , XREF_BIBR Patients with both a high IL-6 level and a high IL-1beta level exhibited shortened overall and progression-free survival , a reduction in the tumor control rate , and a high dose intensity of gemcitabine monotherapy compared with pancreatic cancer patients with low levels of both IL-6 and IL-1beta .
XREF_BIBR Therefore , the serum levels of IL-6 and IL-1beta predict the efficacy of gemcitabine monotherapy in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer .
IL-8 stimulates the expression of VEGF , neuropilin-2 , and VEGF receptor , which are key molecules in angiogenesis .
In addition , IL-8 increases the activation of MAPK pathway for cell growth , survival , and tumorigenesis.XREF _ BIBR It has been reported that IL-8 promotes tumor aggressiveness and invasiveness in pancreatic cancer.XREF _ BIBR In addition , IL-8 enhances the invasiveness by regulating matrix metalloproteinase-2 activity in human pancreatic cancer cells.XREF _ BIBR Both IL-8 and chemokine CXCL12 promote migration and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells.XREF _ BIBR  TNF-alpha promotes pancreatic cancer cell proliferation.XREF _ BIBR TNF-alpha induces the invasiveness of human pancreatic cancer cells and promotes tumor growth and metastasis in mice.XREF _ BIBR Treatment of anti-TNF-alpha suppresses tumor growth and metastasis.XREF _ BIBR    BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS IN PANCREATIC CANCER .
Treatments for pancreatic cancer patients are surgery , chemotherapy , radiation , and targeted therapy .
However , low survival rate of patients with pancreatic cancer needs improved therapeutic and chemopreventive strategies .
Since ROS mediate cancer associated signaling in pancreatic cancer development as described above , supplementation of antioxidant compounds may prevent pancreatic cancer development .
Curcumin , resveratrol , and genistein have antioxidant activitiesXREF_BIBR-XREF_BIBR and showed anti-cancer effects against pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo experiments.XREF _ BIBR-XREF_BIBR  Curcumin ( diferuloylmethane ) inhibits the proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells and suppresses the activation of NF-kappaB .
XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR Soluble curcumin analogue inhibits NF-kappaB-DNA binding activity and induces apoptotic cell death in pancreatic cancer cells.XREF _ BIBR Moreover , curcumin inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis through down-regulating the Notch signaling pathway in pancreatic cancer BxPC-3 and PANC-1 cells.XREF _ BIBR , XREF_BIBR Using orthotopic xenograft model of human pancreatic cancer Mia PaCa-2 cells , curcumin enhanced the antitumor activity of gemcitabine by inhibiting cell proliferation and NF-kappaB-regulated cyclin D1 , Bcl-xL and survivin genes.XREF _ BIBR In addition , curcumin inhibits constitutive STAT3 phosphorylation and down-regulation of survivin expression in human pancreatic cancer cells.XREF _ BIBR Regarding EMT in carcinogenesis , curcumin reverses EMT of TGF-beta-stimulated pancreatic PANC-1 cancer cells by inhibiting the Hedgehog signaling.XREF _ BIBR  Resveratrol plays dual roles in pancreatic cancer : as a tumor suppressor via the up-regulation of Bax ; as a tumor activator via the up-regulation of VEGF-B ; and the anticancer effect of resveratrol is much stronger than its cancer promotion effect .
Since resveratrol shows chemosensitization effect on tumor cells , the combination of resveratrol with pharmacological inhibitor of VEGF-B has been suggested as a promising modality for clinical pancreatic cancer therapy.XREF _ BIBR The chemosensitization of tumor cells by resveratrol appears to be mediated through its ability to modulate multiple cell signaling molecules , including drug transporters , cell survival proteins , cell proliferative proteins , and members of the NF-kappaB and STAT3 signaling pathways.XREF _ BIBR Besides , resveratrol inhibits EMT of pancreatic BxPC-3 and PANC-1 cancer cells through the PI-3K/AKT/NF-kB signaling.XREF _ BIBR  Genistein stimulates apoptotic effects of the chemotherapeutic drugs cisplatinXREF_BIBR and gemcitabineXREF_BIBR by inhibiting NF-kappaB activity .
Treatment of genistein inhibits pancreatic cancer cell growth and induces apoptosis through the down-regulation of NF-kappaB and Notch-1 signaling.XREF _ BIBR Genistein reverses the epithelial to mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) of FoxM1 overexpressing pancreatic AsPC-1 cancer cells.XREF _ BIBR    CONCLUSIONS .
ROS are produced by the activated NOX in pancreatic cancer .
Growth factors , ECM proteins , and cytokines protect pancreatic cancer cells from apoptosis .
ROS induce activation of p38 MAPK , NF-kappaB , and JAK2-STAT1/3 pathway , leading to suppression of apoptosis as well as induction of EMT and cytokine expression which amplify ROS mediated signaling in pancreatic cancer cells .
Cytokines promote pancreatic tumor cell progression , angiogenesis , and the activation of MAPK pathway , which is important for cell growth , survival , and tumorigenesis .
STAT3 contributes to tumor initiation by promoting the dedifferentiation of the acinar cells to cancer cells .
Since ROS activate STAT3 and MAPK as well as induction of cytokines , targeting ROS may contribute to the prevention of cancer progression in pancreatic tissues .
Curcumin inhibits the proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells and suppresses the activation of NF-kappaB and expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in pancreatic cancer cells .
Resveratrol inhibit proliferation of pancreatic cancer .
Genistein stimulates apoptotic effects of the chemotherapeutic drugs , and reverses EMT of pancreatic cancer cells .
Taken together , supplement of antioxidant compounds may be beneficial for preventing the development and/or initiation of pancreatic cancer .
