Regulation of C/EBPbeta1 by Ras in mammary epithelial cells and the role of C/EBPbeta1 in oncogene induced senescence .
Overexpression of Ras ( V12 ) in MCF10A cells , an immortalized mammary epithelial cell line , leads to transformation of these cells .
We demonstrate that this is accompanied by degradation of C/EBPbeta1 .
C/EBPbeta is a transcription factor in which three protein isoforms exist due to alternative translation at three in-frame methionines .
When C/EBPbeta1 is expressed in MCF10A-Ras ( V12 ) cells , immunoblot analysis reveals that C/EBPbeta1 is degraded in these cells .
Treatment of the MCF10A-Ras ( V12 )-C/EBPbeta1 cells with the cdk inhibitor roscovitine leads to stabilization of C/EBPbeta1 .
It has been previously shown that cdk2 phosphorylates C/EBPbeta on Thr235 .
We demonstrate that mutation of Thr235 to alanine in C/EBPbeta1 is sufficient to restore the stability of C/EBPbeta1 expression in the MCF10A-Ras ( V12 ) cells .
Overexpression of Ras ( V12 ) in primary cells induces senescence rather than transformation , thus suppressing tumorigenesis .
C/EBPbeta is required for Ras ( V12 )-induced senescence in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) .
Upregulation of IL6 by C/EBPbeta has been shown to be necessary for oncogene induced senescence , but the specific isoform of C/EBPbeta has not been investigated .
We show that the C/EBPbeta1 isoform upregulates IL6 when introduced into normal fibroblasts .
Additionally , we show that C/EBPbeta1 induces senescence .
Taken together , degradation of C/EBPbeta1 by Ras activation may represent a mechanism to bypass OIS .
Introduction .
Ras signaling leads to proliferation and cell survival and is activated in many cancers .
Aberrant function of the Ras pathway is very common in breast cancers ( reviewed in  XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ) .
Introduction of activated Ras ( V12 ) into most immortalized cell lines , including the immortalized MCF10A human mammary epithelial cell ( HMEC ) line , leads to transformation .
However , when Ras ( V12 ) is expressed in primary cells , these cells senesce instead of undergoing transformation .
This oncogene induced senescence ( OIS ) displayed by primary cells represents a tumor suppressive mechanism inherent in these cells .
Research is ongoing to determine the proteins and pathways involved in Ras transformation and Ras induced senescence .
It is important to determine the different molecular players necessary for Ras transformation versus Ras induced senescence , as these could be critical targets for cancer therapy .
C/EBPbeta , an essential downstream mediator of both Ras transformation ( XREF_BIBR ) and activated Ras and Raf ( a downstream mediator of Ras signaling )-induced senescence ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ) , is a member of the CCAAT and enhancer binding protein ( C/EBP ) family of basic leucine zipper transcription factors .
Three protein isoforms of C/EBPbeta exist due to alternative translation initiation at three in-frame methionines .
In humans , full-length C/EBPbeta1 begins at the first in-frame ATG and has an apparent molecular weight of 52kDa .
C/EBPbeta2 begins at the second in-frame methionine , 23 amino acids downstream from the first and appears as a doublet on immunoblots at 45kDa and 48kDa .
C/EBPbeta3 begins at the last in-frame ATG at amino acid 198 and has an apparent molecular weight of 20kDa .
C/EBPbeta1 and C/EBPbeta2 both contain the C-terminal DNA binding and dimerization domain and an N-terminal transactivation domain , allowing them to function as transcriptional activators .
C/EBPbeta3 lacks the N-terminal transactivation domain and thus represses transcription ( XREF_BIBR ) .
The C/EBPbeta knockout mouse demonstrated that C/EBPbeta is essential for proper development of the mammary gland .
These mice display a dual phenotype : a defect in MEC proliferation and differentiation ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ) .
The production of multiple isoforms of C/EBPbeta may explain how a single transcription factor can regulate both differentiation and proliferation .
The functional differences between the transactivator isoforms of C/EBPbeta have not been studied in great detail .
C/EBPbeta1 is oftentimes mistaken for the 48 kDa ( top band ) of the C/EBPbeta2 doublet on immunoblots largely because C/EBPbeta1 is not expressed in transformed cell lines ( see below ) .
Because of this difficulty in deciphering between C/EBPbeta1 and -2 and because both isoforms are transcriptional activators , many consider them to be functionally redundant .
However , recent studies indicate C/EBPbeta1 and -2 both play unique and important roles .
For example , C/EBPbeta1 but not C/EBPbeta2 cooperates with c-Myb to transactivate differentiation genes in myeloid cells via the ability of C/EBPbeta1 , but not -2 , to recruit the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex ( XREF_BIBR ) .
Additionally , C/EBPbeta1 but not C/EBPbeta2 can be modified by the post-translational modification SUMO-2/3 ( XREF_BIBR ) .
Furthermore , a striking difference exists in the expression profiles of C/EBPbeta1 and -2 in normal versus tumorigenic HMECs ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ) .
C/EBPbeta1 is found in normal MECs from reduction mammoplasties , whereas C/EBPbeta2 is not .
Moreover , a majority of human breast tumors express significant levels of C/EBPbeta2 .
( XREF_BIBR ) .
C/EBPbeta2 is expressed in breast cancer cell lines , while p52-C and EBPbeta1 is not .
Further investigation indicated that these distinct expression profiles have functional significance .
C/EBPbeta2 , but not C/EBPbeta1 , can transactivate cyclin D1 ( XREF_BIBR ) and PLAC1 ( Koslwski et al. , 2009 ) , two genes whose protein products are involved in proliferation and commonly upregulated in breast cancer .
Furthermore , C/EBPbeta2 , but not C/EBPbeta1 , over-expression in MCF10A MECs transforms this cell line ( XREF_BIBR ) .
Taken together , these data suggest that C/EBPbeta1 and -2 are functionally distinct in MECs , with C/EBPbeta1 playing a role in non proliferating MECs and C/EBPbeta2 promoting proliferation and other transforming characteristics .
Since C/EBPbeta is an essential downstream mediator of Ras signaling , the production of multiple isoforms of C/EBPbeta may be a potential mechanism to explain the functional differences observed upon expression of Ras ( V12 ) .
C/EBPbeta is crucial for both Ras transformation and Ras induced senescence .
XREF_BIBR  reported that v-Ha-ras transgenic mice deficient for C/EBPbeta had smaller and fewer skin tumors than v-Ha-ras mice that expressed C/EBPbeta .
They also demonstrated that C/EBPbeta cooperates with Ras ( V12 ) in transformation of NIH-3T3 cells .
Recently , C/EBPbeta has been shown to be necessary for Ras induced senescence ( XREF_BIBR ) .
Additionally , activation of interleukin-6 ( IL6 ) by C/EBPbeta is essential for activated Raf ( E600 )-induced senescence ( XREF_BIBR ) .
C/EBPbeta is phosphorylated in response to Ras signaling , and this phosphorylation is oftentimes critical for the Ras induced phenotype observed .
A residue in C/EBPbeta that is frequently phosphorylated upon Ras ( V12 ) introduction is threonine 235 ( Thr235 ) in humans ( Thr189 in rat , Thr188 in mouse ) .
XREF_BIBR  revealed that Ras ( V12 ) expression in NIH-3T3s enhanced phosphorylation of Thr189 in C/EBPbeta by cyclin dependent kinase-2 ( cdk2 ) .
Additionally , this site in C/EBPbeta2 is necessary for the Ras stimulated interaction of C/EBPbeta2 and serum response factor for transactivation of serum response element in NIH-3T3 cells and was shown to be phosphorylated by Erk-2 ( XREF_BIBR ) .
As mentioned earlier , transformed cell lines typically do not express p52-C and EBPbeta1 .
However , the immortal but non transformed HMEC line , MCF10A , expresses all three C/EBPbeta isoforms .
In the current study , we demonstrate that when Ras ( V12 ) is introduced into MCF10As , transformation is accompanied by degradation of p52-C and EBPbeta1 .
Treatment of MCF10A-Ras cells forced to express C/EBPbeta1 with the cdk inhibitor roscovitine stabilizes p52-C and EBPbeta1 .
It has been previously shown that cdk2 phosphorylates C/EBPbeta on Thr235 ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ) .
We demonstrate that mutation of Thr235 to alanine in C/EBPbeta1 is sufficient to restore stability of p52-C and EBPbeta1 expression in MCF10A-Ras cells .
Since we observed that Ras ( V12 ) negatively regulates C/EBPbeta1 in immortalized MCF10As , a cell line that escapes senescence upon introduction of Ras ( V12 ) , and we know that Ras ( V12 ) induces senescence in a C/EBPbeta dependent manner in normal cells , we decided to examine whether C/EBPbeta1 was able to induce senescence .
Induction of IL6 by C/EBPbeta is critical for activated Raf ( E600 )-induced senescence ( XREF_BIBR ) .
When C/EBPbeta -1 and -2 are compared , only full length C/EBPbeta1 strongly upregulates IL6 when introduced into the normal human diploid fibroblasts ( HDFs ) , WI-38 .
Additionally we show that C/EBPbeta1 is a more potent inducer of senescence in these cells .
Our results indicate that C/EBPbeta1 is negatively regulated by Ras ( V12 ) in immortalized MCF10As and this full length C/EBPbeta isoform is able to induce senescence in WI-38 cells by inducing IL6 .
Taken together , degradation of C/EBPbeta1 by Ras activation may represent a mechanism to bypass OIS .
Results .
Ras ( V12 ) negatively regulates C/EBPbeta1 by causing degradation of C/EBPbeta1 in MCF10As .
Expression of all three isoforms of C/EBPbeta is observed via immunoblot of cell lysates from MCF10As , an immortalized yet untransformed MEC line ( XREF_FIG , lane 1 ) .
Introduction of Ras ( V12 ) into MCF10As ( MCF10A-Ras ) transforms this cell line ( XREF_SUPPLEMENTARY ) .
Examination of C/EBPbeta expression in MCF10A-Ras cells indicates there is a striking loss of C/EBPbeta1 expression ( XREF_FIG , lane 2 ) .
After observing that introduction of Ras ( V12 ) into MCF10As leads to loss of endogenous C/EBPbeta1 expression , we expressed T7-tagged-C and EBPbeta1 with the retroviral vector LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1-IRES-eGFP .
Infected cells were sorted by fluorescence activated cell sorting ( FACS ) using green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) as a marker .
Immediately after sorting , p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 was expressed in both the MCF10A and MCF10A-Ras cells ( XREF_FIG ) .
However , T7-C and EBPbeta1 expression three weeks post-sorting is shown in  XREF_FIG .
The MCF10A-C and EBPbeta1 cells still expressed p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 ( XREF_FIG , lanes 1 and 3 ;  XREF_FIG , lanes 1-7 ) , but the MCF10A-Ras-C and EBPbeta1 cells largely lost p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 expression ( XREF_FIG , lanes 2 and 4 ;  XREF_FIG , lanes 8-14 ) .
A 31kDa band was observed in the MCF10A-Ras-C and EBPbeta1 cells in the anti-T7 tag immunoblot , indicative of proteolysis ( XREF_FIG , Lane 2 ) .
This was confirmed by the presence of 31kDa and 23kDa bands in the anti-C-terminal C/EBPbeta immunoblot ( XREF_FIG , Lane 3 ) .
These smaller molecular weight bands were not present in the MCF10A-C and EBPbeta1 cells ( XREF_FIG , Lanes 1 and 3 ) .
To determine whether T7-C and EBPbeta1 is being proteolyzed by the proteasome in the MCF10A-Ras cells , we treated the cells with MG132 , a proteasomal inhibitor .
Treatment of MCF10A-Ras-C and EBPbeta1 cells with MG132 stabilized expression of p52-T7-CEBPbeta1 ( XREF_FIG , compare lanes 3 and 4 to 2 ) .
A similar effect was observed upon treatment with lactacystin , another proteasomal inhibitor ( data not shown ) .
Furthermore , treatment of MCF10A-Ras cells with MG132 stabilizes endogenous C/EBPbeta1 ( XREF_FIG ) .
We then wanted to determine whether degradation of C/EBPbeta1 may be ubiquitin mediated .
MCF10A-Ras-C and EBPbeta1 cells were treated with MG132 and immunoprecipitated with T7-tag antibody beads .
Immunoblot analysis with a Ubiquitin antibody demonstrated that MCF10A-Ras-C and EBPbeta1 cells treated with MG132 exhibit increased reactivity with this antibody compared to controls ( XREF_FIG  lanes 5 versus lanes 3 and 4 ) .
Immunoblot analysis of the treated cells with the C/EBPbeta antibody demonstrates a ladder of higher molecular weight bands that coincide with the molecular weights of bands in the ubiquitin immunoblot ( XREF_FIG  lanes 2 and 5 , see arrows ) , indicating ubiquitination of C/EBPbeta1 .
Most breast cancer cell lines exhibit activation of the Ras pathway through activation of upstream receptors , upregulation of Ras itself , or through activation of downstream signaling molecules ( Melaney and Daly , 2001 ,  XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_SUPPLEMENTARY ) .
Therefore we expressed T7-C and EBPbeta1 in the breast cancer cell lines MDA231 and MDA435 in which the Ras pathway is activated .
Expression of T7-C and EBPbeta1 in MDA231s and MDA435s decreases over time , similar to the MCF10A-Ras-C and EBPbeta1 cells , and p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 was stabilized when MDA231-C and EBPbeta1 and MDA435-C and EBPbeta1 cells were exposed to MG132 ( XREF_FIG , lane 3 versus 4 , and data not shown ) .
Treatment with the cdk inhibitor roscovitine or mutation of C/EBPbeta1 Thr235 to alanine stabilizes expression of T7-C and EBPbeta1 in MCF10A-Ras cells .
Ras ( V12 ) expression in the MCF10A-Ras cells may lead to phosphorylation of C/EBPbeta1 , which is subsequently causing degradation of C/EBPbeta1 .
To further investigate the mechanism by which Ras negatively regulates C/EBPbeta1 , MCF10A-Ras-C and EBPbeta1 cells were treated with a panel of kinase inhibitors that inhibit kinases known to phosphorylate C/EBPbeta .
Treatment with the cdk inhibitor roscovitine stabilized expression of p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 ( XREF_FIG , compare lanes 2 and 4 ) .
C/EBPbeta is phosphorylated on Thr235 by cdk2 ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ) .
More specifically , C/EBPbeta1 can be phosphorylated on Thr235 by cdk2 in vitro ( XREF_FIG ) .
This phosphorylation can be inhibited by treatment with roscovitine ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR , data not shown ) .
Treatment with roscovitine was the only treatment that stabilized expression of p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 in MCF10A-Ras cells .
Treatment of MDA231-C and EBPbeta1 cells with roscovitine also stabilized expression of p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 ( data not shown ) .
Importantly , cdk2 is activated in MCF10A-Ras and MDA231 cells ( XREF_SUPPLEMENTARY ) .
To confirm that phosphorylation by cdk2 on C/EBPbeta1-Thr 235 was leading to degradation of C/EBPbeta1 , Thr235 was mutated to alanine ( T235A ) so this residue could no longer be phosphorylated .
An LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1T235A-IRES-eGFP retroviral vector was constructed and the resulting retrovirus used to infect MCF10A-Ras cells .
These cells were sorted by FACS using GFP as a marker .
Mutation of Thr235 to alanine in C/EBPbeta1 , thus preventing phosphorylation of this residue by cdk2 , stabilized the expression of p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 after three weeks in culture ( XREF_FIG , lane 3 versus 6 ) as compared to T7-C and EBPbeta1 that did not contain this mutation ( XREF_FIG , lane 2 versus 5 ) .
T7-C and EBPbeta1 and T7-C and EBPbeta1T235A expression did not have an effect on the transformed phenotype of MCF10A-Ras cells , as these cells ' ability to form colonies in soft agar was unaltered ( XREF_SUPPLEMENTARY ) .
T7-C and EBPbeta1 and T7-C and EBPbeta1T235A are unable to induce senescence in MCF10A cells in part because these cells have the p14ARF/p15INK4B/p16INK4A locus deleted ( XREF_BIBR ) .
p16INK4A is an important player in OIS , and C/EBPbeta induced senescence signals through this tumor suppressor during OIS ( XREF_BIBR ) .
Additionally , C/EBPbeta has been shown to induce p15INK4B during OIS ( XREF_BIBR ) .
C/EBPbeta1 is not degraded upon Ras ( V12 ) introduction into WI-38 normal HDFs .
Recently , C/EBPbeta has been shown to be essential for Ras ( V12 ) - and Raf ( E600 ) - induced senescence in MEFs and HDFs , respectively ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ) .
We decided to determine which isoform of C/EBPbeta is responsible for induction of senescence .
We hypothesized that since Ras negatively regulates C/EBPbeta1 by leading to its degradation during Ras transformation , that this full length isoform of C/EBPbeta is responsible for inducing senescence .
First , we wanted to determine if introduction of Ras ( V12 ) , and thus induction of senescence , negatively regulates C/EBPbeta1 expression in normal HDFs , cells commonly used to study senescence .
XREF_FIG  is an immunoblot with an antibody specific for the N-terminal 23 amino acids present only in C/EBPbeta1 .
This immunoblot demonstrates that Ras ( V12 ) does not lead to degradation of C/EBPbeta1 in the normal WI-38 cells ( XREF_FIG , lanes 2 and 3 ) .
C/EBPbeta1 expression in WI-38 cells inhibits growth .
Next , we tested whether exogenous expression of C/EBPbeta1 had an effect on growth of normal fibroblasts .
We performed a colony formation assay using uninfected WI-38 cells or WI-38 cells infected with LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1-IRES-eGFP or LZRS-eGFP and sorted by FACs using GFP as a marker .
As shown in  XREF_FIG , there were significantly fewer WI-38-T7-C and EBPbeta1 colonies compared to controls ( p = 0.007 ) , indicating T7-C and EBPbeta1 expression in WI-38 cells inhibits growth and is potentially causing these cells to senesce .
To confirm these findings , we performed a bromodeoxyuridine ( Brdu ) assay using uninfected WI-38 cells , or sorted WI-38 cells expressing T7-C and EBPbeta1 and GFP or GFP only , as shown in  XREF_FIG .
The WI-38-T7-C and EBPbeta1 cells have significantly less Brdu staining than controls ( p = 0.027 ) , confirming the results from  XREF_FIG  that C/EBPbeta1 expression in WI-38 cells inhibits their proliferation .
C/EBPbeta1 induces IL6 in WI-38 fibroblasts .
XREF_BIBR  reported that activated Raf ( E600 )-induced senescence in HDFs is due to activation of an inflammatory transcriptome .
This elegant study demonstrated that activated Raf ( E600 )-induced senescence was dependent upon IL6 activation by C/EBPbeta .
Thus we examined if a specific transactivator isoform of C/EBPbeta was inducing IL6 expression .
RNA was prepared six days posti-infection from WI-38 cells infected with LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1-IRES-eGFP , LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta2-IRES-eGFP , LZRS-GFP , or pBABE-Ras ( V12 )-puromycin .
cDNA was prepared from the RNA and qPCR was performed using an IL6 primer .
T7-C and EBPbeta1-WI -38 cells and the positive control Ras ( V12 )-expressing cells highly upregulate IL6 RNA 6.6 fold and 8 fold , respectively ( XREF_FIG ) .
T7-C and EBPbeta2 only induces IL6 expression 2.1 fold compared to uninfected cells despite approximately equal levels of T7-C and EBPbeta1 and T7-C and EBPbeta2 protein being expressed on day 6 ( XREF_FIG ) .
C/EBPbeta1 , and to a lesser extent C/EBPbeta2 , induces senescence in WI-38 HDFs .
Knowing that C/EBPbeta1 induces IL6 to a much greater level than C/EBPbeta2 , we determined if C/EBPbeta1 could cause senescence more effectively .
WI-38 cells infected with LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1-IRES-eGFP , LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta2-IRES-eGFP , LZRS-GFP , or pBABE-Ras ( V12 )-puromycin were fixed and stained for senescence associated beta-galactosidase six days post-infection ( XREF_FIG ) .
On average , over 53 % of the T7-C and EBPbeta1-WI -38 cells and over 55 % of the positive control Ras ( V12 )-WI-38 cells stained a bright blue , compared to 34.5 % of the T7-C and EBPbeta2-expressing cells .
Less than 20 % of control uninfected or LZRS-GFP cells stained a faint blue .
A statistically significant difference in blue staining exists between the T7-C and EBPbeta1- and Ras ( V12 )-expressing WI-38 cells versus uninfected , resulting in p values 0.005 and 0.003 , respectively ( XREF_FIG ) .
This is consistent with T7-C and EBPbeta1-expressing cells inhibiting growth as shown earlier .
Although the T7-C and EBPbeta2 cells induced senescence to a lesser extent than T7-C and EBPbeta1 , the percentage of blue cells was still statistically significant as compared to uninfected cells , with a p value of 0.03 .
Approximately equal levels of T7-C and EBPbeta1 and T7-C and EBPbeta2 were expressed ( XREF_FIG ) .
To confirm these findings , p16INK4A protein levels were examined , as p16INK4A is upregulated during senescence .
WI-38 cells were uninfected , infected with LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1-IRES-eGFP , LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta2-IRES-eGFP or LZRS-GFP , cell lysates were prepared 6 days post-infection and immunoblot analysis was performed for p16INK4A expression .
XREF_FIG  indicates that C/EBPbeta1 and C/EBPbeta2 expression in WI-38 cells induces p16INK2A expression , verifying the induction of senescence .
Discussion .
Introduction of Ras ( V12 ) into immortalized MCF10As transforms these cells .
We demonstrate here that Ras ( V12 ) introduction into MCF10As and subsequent transformation is accompanied by degradation of C/EBPbeta1 .
We show that when T7-C and EBPbeta1 is expressed in MCF10A and MCF10A-Ras cells , MCF10A-C and EBPbeta1 cells maintain expression of p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 , whereas MCF10A-Ras cells degrade p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 .
Stability of C/EBPbeta1 expression may be regulated by ubiquitin dependent degradation ( XREF_FIG ) .
It has been previously demonstrated that p52-C and EBPbeta1 is expressed in normal mammary epithelial tissue and cultured normal MECs , but not in breast cancer cells ( XREF_BIBR ) .
The Ras pathway is activated in most breast cancers .
Expression of T7-C and EBPbeta1 in the breast cancer cell lines MDA231 and MDA435 decreased over time , similar to T7-C and EBPbeta1 expression in MCF10A-Ras cells .
Additionally , treatment of MDA231- and MDA435-C and EBPbeta1 cells with a proteasomal inhibitor stabilized expression of p52-T7-C and EBPbeta1 .
Therefore it is likely that C/EBPbeta1 is negatively regulated in breast cancer through activation of the Ras pathway .
C/EBPbeta is phosphorylated by a number of kinases in the Ras pathway .
Therefore we treated the MCF10A-Ras-C and EBPbeta1 cells with a panel of kinase inhibitors to determine if inhibiting phosphorylation could stabilize p52-C and EBPbeta1 expression .
We found that treatment with the cdk inhibitor roscovitine stabilized C/EBPbeta1 expression .
Ras activation activates cdk2 ( XREF_SUPPLEMENTARY ; reviewed in  XREF_BIBR ) .
Two independent groups have demonstrated that C/EBPbeta can be phosphorylated on Thr235 by cdk2 ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ) .
This phosphorylation is specific to the cdk family member cdk2 , and when cells are treated with roscovitine there is a decrease in phosphorylation of Thr235 .
Additionally , knockdown of cdk2 decreases phosphorylation of C/EBPbetaThr235 ( XREF_BIBR ) .
The non phosphorylatable C/EBPbeta1T235A could be stably expressed in MCF10A-Ras cells as compared to wild type C/EBPbeta1 .
Therefore , activation of the Ras pathway in MECs negatively regulates C/EBPbeta1 by promoting phosphorylation of C/EBPbeta1 on Thr235 by cdk2 and subsequently leading to degradation of C/EBPbeta1 .
Loss of T7-C and EBPbeta1 does take several days .
This may be due to an initial compensatory mechanism by the cell leading to increased synthesis of C/EBPbeta1 and/or a requirement for expression of a specific ubiquitin E3 ligase necessary for the degradation of C/EBPbeta1 .
Although introduction of Ras ( V12 ) into many immortalized cell lines leads to transformation , introduction of Ras ( V12 ) into primary cells has a different effect .
Normal fibroblasts , such as WI-38 HDFs , undergo senescence when forced to express oncogenes such as activated Ras ( V12 ) or Raf ( E600 ) .
XREF_BIBR  demonstrated that C/EBPbeta is necessary for Ras ( V12 )-induced senescence in MEFs , which occurred in a pRB dependent manner .
Recently  XREF_BIBR  has shown that C/EBPbeta is required for activated Raf ( E600 )-induced senescence in HDFs .
In the present study we set out to determine which transactivator isoform of C/EBPbeta is responsible for OIS , as there is increasing evidence for functional differences between the transactivator isoforms ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR , Kowentz-Leutz and Leutz , 1999 ) .
First we demonstrate that C/EBPbeta1 is not degraded in senescing WI-38-Ras cells ( XREF_FIG ) .
This is because cdk2 is not activated in these cells due to activation of cdk inhibitors .
XREF_BIBR  demonstrated that C/EBPbeta induced senescence through induction of IL6 .
We show that it is the full length isoform , C/EBPbeta1 , that is able to robustly induce IL6 expression .
Accordingly , we demonstrate that C/EBPbeta1 is the strongest inducer of senescence in WI-38 fibroblasts .
C/EBPbeta2 can induce senescence to a lesser extent .
It is interesting that C/EBPbeta2 expression in WI-38 fibroblasts does induce senescence .
Because C/EBPbeta1 is expressed in the WI-38 cells , we can not rule out that C/EBPbeta2 is heterodimerizing with the endogenous C/EBPbeta1 to induce IL6 and thus senescence , albeit at a lower level .
Whether as a heterodimer or homodimer , C/EBPbeta2 may be upregulating the expression of other factors involved in OIS .
Taken together , it is likely that Ras ( V12 )/Raf ( E600 ) is working through C/EBPbeta1 to induce IL6 and lead to senescence in normal cells .
We propose that degradation of C/EBPbeta1 by Ras ( V12 ) may be a mechanism by which cells bypass OIS .
Loss of expression of full length C/EBPbeta1 may be necessary for escape from senescence and a step closer to transformation .
Further support of this lies in the expression profile of C/EBPbeta1 in normal versus transformed cells .
C/EBPbeta1 is present in normal cells , and is not degraded when Ras ( V12 ) is introduced and induces senescence in normal cells ( XREF_FIG ) .
Additionally , this first isoform of C/EBPbeta is negatively regulated by Ras during Ras ( V12 ) transformation of MCF10As ( XREF_FIG ) .
p52-C and EBPbeta1 expression is not observed in breast cancer cells in which the Ras pathway is activated .
The expression pattern of C/EBPbeta1 in normal versus transformed cells supports our current findings that C/EBPbeta1 plays an important role in senescence and is negatively regulated during transformation .
It is not surprising that a protein that plays a critical role in OIS , a tumor suppressive mechanism , be down-regulated during transformation .
Moreover , recently it has been shown that cdk2 suppresses cellular senescence , consistent with our findings that inhibiting cdk2 with roscovitine stabilizes expression of C/EBPbeta1 , a factor involved in senescence ( Campaner et al. , Hydbring et al. ) .
In further support of our findings ,  XREF_BIBR  used a C/EBPbeta construct in which the start sites for C/EBPbeta2 and -3 were mutated such that only C/EBPbeta1 could be translated .
They demonstrated that expression of this construct in HDFs led to cell cycle arrest and induction of IL6 , consistent with our results .
The production of multiple isoforms of C/EBPbeta is a possible explanation for which this transcription factor could regulate the functional differences observed upon expression of Ras ( V12 ) .
Our data indicate that C/EBPbeta1 is the isoform responsible for mediating Ras ( V12 )-induced senescence .
In contrast to C/EBPbeta1 , C/EBPbeta2 expression is not negatively regulated in MCF10A cells upon Ras ( V12 )-induced transformation ( XREF_FIG ) .
Additionally , overexpression of C/EBPbeta2 in MCF10As leads to the acquisition of tumorigenic characteristics ( XREF_BIBR ) , similarly to Ras ( V12 ) expression in these cells .
Therefore , Ras may be signaling to this second isoform of C/EBPbeta during transformation .
Unfortunately it is not possible to knockdown each specific isoform of C/EBPbeta via siRNA technology and determine the role each isoform is playing , because all three isoforms are translated from a single mRNA molecule .
Importantly , one study has examined the specific role of C/EBPbeta2 in activated macrophages by generating a knock-in mouse in which the second in-frame methionine necessary for translation of C/EBPbeta2 was replaced with an alanine ( XREF_BIBR ) .
This abolished expression of C/EBPbeta2 in these mice .
The induction of C/EBPbeta target genes , such as IL6 , was examined in this study .
Activated macrophages in the mice unable to express C/EBPbeta2 were still able to induce IL6 expression , consistent with our current findings that C/EBPbeta2 is not the primary isoform responsible for induction of IL6 in HDFs .
C/EBPbeta plays many functional roles in the cell , even roles that seem conflicting such as cell survival , cell death , proliferation , senescence , and transformation .
This may be explained in part by the presence of the different isoforms of C/EBPbeta and their functional differences .
Future studies on C/EBPbeta will need to take into consideration that the different isoforms of this transcription factor are likely playing functionally distinct roles .
Degradation of C/EBPbeta1 by Ras ( V12 ) may be a mechanism by which cells bypass OIS .
Our study sheds light on how Ras signaling is altered in Ras ( V12 )-induced senescence versus transformation through the regulation of C/EBPbeta1 , however further investigation of what dictates this transition is necessary to more completely understand this critical switch .
It will be important to determine the details of the signaling between Ras and C/EBPbeta in normal cells to elucidate mechanisms by which this critical signaling that induces OIS can be triggered or maintained to suppress tumorigenesis .
Materials and Methods .
Cell lines .
HMECs , MCF10A , MDA231 , and MDA435 were maintained as described previously ( XREF_BIBR ,  XREF_BIBR ) .
The WI-38 cells ( a gift from the Dr. Hal Moses lab , Vanderbilt University ) were maintained in Eagle 's minimal essential medium supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( HyClone Laboratories Logan , UT , USA ) , 100U/mL penicillin , and 100ug/mL streptomycin ( Life Technologies , Inc. , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) .
The phoenix-ampho packaging cell line was obtained from the ATCC with the permission of GP Nolan ( Stanford University , Palo Alto , CA ) , has been previously described ( XREF_BIBR ) and were maintained as described previously ( Bundy and Sealy , et al. ) .
Cloning of recombinant retroviral constructs and virus preparation .
Generation of LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1-IRES-eGFP was as follows : IRES-eGFP-LZRS and T7-C and EBPbeta1-pcDNA 3.1-His A was generated as described previously ( XREF_BIBR ;  XREF_BIBR ) .
T7-C and EBPbeta1-pcDNA 3.1 was digested with EcoRI and NotI and incubated with DNA Polymerase I .
The resulting T7-C and EBPbeta1 insert was ligated into LZRS-IRES-eGFP , which had been digested with EcoRI and BamHI and incubated with DNA Polymerase I .
This generated LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1-IRES-eGFP .
LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1T235A-IRES-eGFP was generated as follows : NF-IL6T235A-CMV , a generous gift from the Akira laboratory , and our C/EBPbeta1-pRSET-A construct , described in  XREF_BIBR  were digested with MscI and BbsI .
The T235A fragment was ligated into C/EBPbeta1-pRSET-A to create C/EBPbeta1T235A-pRSET-A .
C/EBPbeta1T235A-pRSET-A was digested with HindIII , incubated with DNA Polymerase , and digested with BamHI to isolate C/EBPbeta1T235A .
pcDNA3.1-His-A was digested with BamHI and EcoRV and C/EBPbeta1T235A insert was ligated into this to create C/EBPbeta1T235A-pcDNA 3.1-His-A .
C/EBPbeta1T235A-pcDNA 3.1-His-A was digested with HindIII and XbaI and incubated with DNA Polymerase to isolate T7-C and EBPbeta1T235A .
LZRS-IRES-eGFP was digested with EcoRI and incubated with DNA Polymerase .
T7-C and EBPbeta1T235A was ligated into LZRS-IRES-eGFP to create LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta1-IRES-eGFP .
LZRS-T7-C and EBPbeta2-IRES-eGFP was generated similar to described in  XREF_BIBR .
The only difference being T7-C and EBPbeta2-IRES-eGFP-LZRS was digested with EcoRI , incubated with DNA Polymerase , and re-ligated .
Recombinant amphotropic retroviral stock generation and retroviral infection were performed as described in  XREF_BIBR .
The pBABE-Ras ( V12 )-puromycin retroviral construct was a kind gift from Dr. Scott Lowe , Cold Spring Harbor .
Cells were infected once and selected with 1ug/mL puromycin ( Sigma Chemical Co. , St. Louis , MO , USA ) .
Preparation of cell lysates and immunoblot analysis .
Cell lysates were prepared from 100 mm dishes of 90 % confluent cells as described previously ( XREF_BIBR ) .
Relative protein concentrations were determined using the Protein Assay Reagent ( BioRad Laboratories , Hercules , CA , USA ) as per manufacturer 's instructions .
Proteins were transferred from the gel to Immobilon P filters .
Immunoblots were processed as previously described ( XREF_BIBR ) .
The anti-pErk , anti-Erk , anti-cdk2 ( all Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA , USA ) , and anti-pcdk2 ( Cell Signaling Technology , Beverly , MA , USA ) antibodies were used at 1:2000 .
Soft agar colony formation assay .
Complete media and 2 % agar ( Difco , Sparks , MD , USA ) were mixed 2:1 to give a 0.7 % agar solution .
This mixture was pipetted into 60mm dishes to form the bottom layer .
5mL of media containing 1x10 5  cells was mixed with 2.5 mL 1 % agar and added as the top layer .
Cells were fed with media and 1 % agar at a 2:1 ratio .
Supplementary Material .
1                                2                                3
